# PHP Basis

## PHP Language

PHP (recursive acronym for PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor) is a widely-used open source general-purpose scripting language 
that is especially suited for web development and can be embedded into HTML.

What distinguishes PHP from something like client-side JavaScript is that the code is executed on the server, generating 
HTML which is then sent to the client. The client would receive the results of running that script, but would not know
what the underlying code was. You can even configure your web server to process all your HTML files with PHP, and then 
there's really no way that users can tell what you have up your sleeve.

reference https://www.php.net/manual/en/intro-whatis.php

If you want to know more about the history of php please visit:

## Cheat-sheet

### Php Tags

When PHP parses a file, it looks for opening and closing tags, which are <?php and ?> which tell PHP to start and stop 
interpreting the code between them.

Reference https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.basic-syntax.phptags.php

Opening tag: ``` <?php```

Close tag: ```?> ``` 

```php
<?php

// your code goes here.

?>
```

> From php Doc: 
>
>https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.basic-syntax.instruction-separation.php
>
>The closing tag of a PHP block at the end of a file is optional, and in some cases omitting it is helpful when using 
>include or require, so unwanted whitespace will not occur at the end of files, and you will still be able to add headers
> to the response later. It is also handy if you use output buffering, and would not like to see added unwanted whitespace at the end of the parts generated by the included files.

You'll find that all the examples in this course won't include the closing tag.

### Comments 

As seen in the previous example you can comment your code, this will 
avoid PHP of trying to execute those lines. 

Comments in PHP can be done  in several Ways

#### Line comment:
```php
 // This is a single line commnet in php. Never forget the // :)
 ```
#### Block comment:

```php
   /* 
      This is  A block
      comment in PHP 
   */
```
  
### PHP doc comment

```php
    /**
     * This is a PHP DOC comment, note that it starts with /** instead of /*
     *
     * This is just a example, you can read more about of php doc in https://docs.phpdoc.org/
     *
     * @return type Description.
    */
```
### Variables

All variables in php start with **$** sign followed by it's name.

```php
    $var = "foo";
```

There are some rules for variable declaration:

1. A valid variable name starts with a letter or underscore, followed by any number of letters, numbers, or underscores.

2. **$this** is a special variable that can't be assigned.

3. PHP also offers another way to assign values to variables: assign by reference. This means that the new variable simply 
references (in other words, "becomes an alias for" or "points to") the original variable. Changes to the new variable
 affect the original, and vice versa.
    
### Strings

Strings are sequence of characters. In order to assign a string to a variable:
```php
    $var = "foo"; 
```
Or 
```php
    $var = 'foo'; 
```
####Single quotes VS double quotes

If using single quotes, the string will be shown as is, this means that you cannot introduce variables directly to the 
string. With double quotes, you can put varibles in the string sourrend by curly braces and they will be evaluated.

**Examples:**

Show variables in single quotes:
```php
    $var= "pepe";
    //  In this case, we have to concatenate the string with .
    echo 'When someone name is Jose, you can call him' . $var;
    // In this case, we can surround the with curly braces the variable
    // and avoid the concat.
    echo "When someone name is Jose, you can call him {$var}";
```
### Arrays

Arrays in PHP can be constructed by the array() consstructor, or declared with [].

#### Syntax
```php
    $foo = array("bar", ":)");
```
or
```php
    $foo = ["bar", ":)"];
```

If a key is not provided, then php will assign automatically a number for that, starting with 0 and corresponding to the 
index of the element.
For the examples above, both arrays will have the following internal structure.
```
    array(2) {
      [0]=>
      string(1) "bar"
      [1]=>
      string(1) ":)"
    }
```
##### Syntax for associative arrays

You can assign a key to the arrays, in order to do so: $key => $value notation will be needed.

      $foo = array("key1"=>"bar", "key2"=> ":)");
      
or 

      $foo = ["key1"=>"bar", "key2"=> ":)"];

For the examples above, both arrays will have the following internal structure.

    array(2) { ["key1"]=> string(3) "bar" ["key2"]=> string(2) ":)" }
    

You can explore more about arrays here : https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.array.php
### Conditional statements

#### if else statement

    if (condition) {
        // Code for true condition  
    } else {
        // Cocde for false condition
    }
   

#### if, eslseif, else statement
 
    if (condition) {
        // Code for condition == true
    } elseif (condition2) {
        // Code for condition2 == true
    } else {
      // Code when condition1 and condition2 are false;
    }

#### Ternary operators

**Syntax:**
 	   
    (Condition) ? ( Statement for condition true ) : (statement for condition false);
    
Ternary operators often are use for simple evaluation,  and there is a single operation when the condition met or not. 

For instance:
```php
    $testPassed = true;
    print $testPassed ? "Pass" : "Fail";
```

#### Switch case

Switch case statements is used to perform different acctions whe having many conditions. 

##### Syntax

    switch (n) {
      case label1:
        code to be executed if n=label1;
        break;
      case label2:
        code to be executed if n=label2;
        break;
      case label3:
        code to be executed if n=label3;
        break;
        ...
      default:
        code to be executed if n is different from all labels;
      }

**Notes:**
1. break is necessary to avoid the evaluation of the following cases.
2. if you use a return statement, break is not needed.
3. "default" case will be executed if non of the conditions above where true.


#### Loops
##### While 

syntax:

    while (Condition == true) {
      code to be executed;
    }

##### Do while
    
    do {
      code to be executed;
    } while (condition == true);
    
##### For loop

     for (counter; counterCondition; counterIncrement) {
       code to be executed for each iteration;
     }
     
##### Foreach loop

    foreach ($array as $value) {
      code to be executed;
    } 
### Functions and Procedures

#### Syntax

##### Basic 

In php all functions and procedures are declared the same.

    function test() : returnType
    {
        // Your code
        return result;
    }

1. Start by using the keyword function.
2. Function names follow the same rules as other labels in PHP.
3. Parenthesis always must be added after the funciton name.   

##### Functions and procedures difference 

In order to make a difference between a procedure or a function, in php the return type can be used ( PHP version >=7.2)

    function test(typehint $arg1, typheInt $arg2...) : int
    {
        // Your code for a function returning an integer.
        return result;
    }

    function test(typehint $arg1, typheInt $arg2...) : void
    {
        // Your code for a function returning an integer.
        // for a function that returns no result.
    }


##### Type hinting parameters

Parameters can be type hinted by indicated the type of the param.

    function test(int $a, bool $b, string c, array $d, Object $e) : int
    {
        // Your code for a function returning an integer.
        return result;
    }

##### Type hinting return types

In case of functions, return types can also be specified. This is done by adding ": returnType".

    function test(int $a, bool $b, string c) : int
    {
        // Your code for a function returning an integer.
        return result;
    }
### Errors

An error occur when there's something wrong in the code. Php has 4 types of errors.

1. Warning Error.
2. Notice Error.
3. Parse Error. 
4. Fatal Error.

#### Waring Error

Warning errors wont cause PHP to stop running, they warn about a problem that can cause errors in the execution.

#### Notice Error

Notice errors are similar to warning errors, they wont stop the execution. They are minor errors, and notice the user that 
there might be something wrong in the code.

#### Parse Error

Parse errors are syntax errors, the script wont execute if detected.

#### Fatal Error

Fatal errors are critical errors, when present the will stop the execution.
### Exceptions

Exceptions were introduced in PHP 5. Unlike errors, the exceptions can be catch and your code can actually do something 
with them. Exceptions are used very often in object oriented programming.
## Homework

Complete the different exercies in the PHP files in this folder.
